RecordException: Allow additional attributes. (#874)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/api.md

Note that the OpenTelemetry project documents certain ["standard event names and
keys"](semantic_conventions/README.md) which have prescribed semantic meanings.

Note that [`RecordException`](#record-exception) is a specialized variant of

> `AddEvent` for recording exception events.

Reviewer: I like the idea that RecordException is a variant of AddEvent. Perhaps go a bit further and call it AddExceptionEvent?

Author: I don't really have an opinion which name is better and I don't want to expand the scope of this PR. So perhaps this could be done in a follow-up?

Reviewer: A follow-up sounds good.

Reviewer 2: I'm forestalling that follow-up PR but just before I forget that idea: I'd even call it `AddEventWithException`. It may look like a minor nuance but it will be a lot more discoverable since it will be suggested by IDEs when users type `AddEve...`.

Author: Note that @iNikem had a strong opinion on renaming RecordException here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/814#issuecomment-675488827

Reviewer 3: I don't have very strong opinion on renaming `RecordException` to `AddExceptionEvent` or similar. The commend above was about removing `AddExceptionEvent` altogether and replacing it with generic `AddEvent`

#### Record Exception

To facilitate recording an exception languages SHOULD provide a

> `RecordException` method if the language uses exceptions.

Reviewer: >if the language uses exceptions

Do we explicitly rule out Go here? Is the intent? I know that there is an open issue to discuss Go, exceptions and errors (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/764) but would like to understand if this change is intentionally excluding Go for now.

Author: Not really. 😕 I thought I was stating the obvious here, but if it's confusing, I can this change.

This is a specialized variant of [`AddEvent`](#add-events),

> so for anything not specified here the same requirements as for `AddEvent` apply.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so for anything not specified here, the same requirements as for `AddEvent` apply.
```

The signature of the method is to be determined by each language
and can be overloaded as appropriate.
The method MUST record an exception as an `Event` with the conventions outlined in
the [exception semantic conventions](semantic_conventions/exceptions.md) document.
The minimum required argument SHOULD be no more than only an exception object.

If `RecordException` is provided, the method MUST accept an optional parameter
to provide any additional event attributes
(this SHOULD be done in the same way as for the `AddEvent` method).
If attributes with the same name would be generated by the method already,
the additional attributes take precedence.

> Note: `RecordException` may be seen as a renamed overload of `AddEvent` with

Reviewer: Perhaps say "a variant of" instead?

```suggestion
Note: `RecordException` may be seen as a variant of `AddEvent` with
```

#### Record Exception

To facilitate recording an exception languages SHOULD provide a
`RecordException` method if the language uses exceptions.
This is a specialized variant of [`AddEvent`](#add-events), so for anything not specified here
the same requirements as for `AddEvent` apply.

The signature of the method is to be
determined by each language and can be overloaded as appropriate. The method
MUST record an exception as an `Event` with the conventions outlined in the
[exception semantic conventions](semantic_conventions/exceptions.md) document.
The minimum required argument SHOULD be no more than only an exception object.

> If provided, `RecordException` MUST provide an optional parameter to provide

Reviewer 4: This is a bit confusing to me. `If provided... MUST provide...to provide`? What is the thing that is `if provided`?

Author: The RecordException methot. I'll clarify

Author: Done in fa7288b.

any additional event attributes
(this SHOULD be done in the same way as for the `AddEvent` method).
If attributes with the same name would be generated by the method already,
the additional attributes take precedence.
Note: For example, if `exception.stacktrace=""` is provided,
the stacktrace will be an empty string, allowing `RecordException` to skip

> collecting it, speeding up the exception recording.

Reviewer 5: ```
span.RecordException(exception, additionalattribute(exception.stacktrace="")
{
      spanEvent.SetAttribute("exception.stacktrace", exception.ToStackTrace()); // does the slow perf task of getting full stack trace.
      spanEvent.SetAttribute(additionalAttribute); // removes the entry
}
```

One could implement this using above snippet - while this meets spec, it doesn't meet the intention of avoiding collecting (potentially expensive) stacktrace.

Would we be better to provide something like
```
span.RecordException(exception, bool storeStackTraceFromException = true)
```

Or your intention was to avoid the overhead of stacktrace reaching exporter, and not the perf hit associated with getting the stacktrace itself?

Author: I don't completely understand your code snippet. What is the code in `{}` supposed to be? Where does `spanEvent` come from? I would expect a map of additional attributes to be passed to RecordException, so the addition attributes are already known before attempting to record the stacktrace.

Reviewer 5: Sorry I typed bit hurried.
You code snippet makes perfect sense - I was only trying to clarify the following:
If the user does want to RecordException, but does not want to pay the price of obtaining/recording/exporting the stacktrace, one can do the following:
```
span.record_exception(exception, attributes={"exception.stacktrace": ""})
```

OR my suggestion:
```
span.record_exception(exception, recordStackTrace = false)
```

The later can enforce that the implementation will not attempt to obtain the stacktrace.
The former - depending on the implementation, the perf hit of obtaining the stacktrace may or may not be avoided.

Author: With your suggestion, depending on the implementation the performance hit will also not be avoided. E.g. a bad implemenation could do:

```python
stacktrace = traceback.format_exc(exception)
if record_stacktrace:
  attributes["exception.stacktrace"] = stacktrace
```

So I see this as purely a Quality of Implemenation detail.

Reviewer 5: Agree. Even if we ignore the perf concern part, using a boolean `record_stacktrace` looks more user friendly to me.  
The additional attributes option requires user to find the semantic convention tring "exception.stacktrace", and know that setting it to null will achieve what they desire.

Author: True, but the purpose of this PR is to *avoid* having lots and lots of parameters for RecordException, see the PRs linked in the description. That it can also be used to suppress the stacktrace is more of a side effect and I agree the API is not ideal for that. But it should also not be a common thing to do, just if you need to fix performance problems with a particular call site of RecordException.

An actual language implementation will hopefully have constants for "exception.stacktrace", and may mention it in the function documentation, so you don't have to go so far looking.

I think it should also be OK for languages to provide a recordStackTrace optional boolean parameter additionally if the language can handle a large number of optional parameters (e.g. Python has named + default parameters; but in Java you would have to switch to the Builder pattern which may or may not be deemed worth the effort).

Author: @cijothomas So to resolve the issue you brought, up would you prefer, could you please create a new tracking issue or make a comment on #814 (I would remove the "Fixes" then). If you prefer, I can also remove the note about `exception.stacktrace=""` from this PR.

Reviewer 5: If the part about recommending `exception.stacktrace=""` is removed, I am happy to approve :)

We can address "how to avoid stacktrace" etc in the future in the spec. Until, then each language can chose to expose extra parameters, if they wish.

Author: Removed in fa7288b.

Reviewer 5: Approved.
(I also realize the part about `record_stacktrace` require more discussions. Its probably something to be controlled as an overall Sdk setting, rather than per call to `span.RecordException`. Because the library author who is emitting the info should not concern himself with anything other than sending the exception using span.RecordException(exception). Everything else should be configured elsewhere in SDK.
